Amazon Web Services (AWS) Overview

Amazon Web Services (AWS) is a cloud computing platform that provides a wide range of services to help organizations build, deploy, and scale applications without managing physical hardware. AWS offers on-demand, pay-as-you-go resources, making it one of the most popular choices for cloud infrastructure.

Key AWS Services:

Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service)

Object storage service for storing files, backups, and big data.

Used for data lakes, static website hosting, and archiving.


Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud)

Virtual servers in the cloud to run applications.

Provides scalable compute capacity.


AWS Lambda

Serverless compute service to run code without provisioning servers.

Ideal for event-driven applications.


Amazon RDS (Relational Database Service)

Managed relational databases (MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server, etc.).

Automated backups, scaling, and maintenance.


Amazon VPC (Virtual Private Cloud)

Allows you to create isolated networks in AWS.

Controls security, IP ranges, and traffic.


Amazon Athena

Interactive query service to analyze data directly in Amazon S3 using SQL.

No need to set up servers or ETL.


AWS Glue

Serverless data integration service for ETL (Extract, Transform, Load).

Prepares and transforms data for analytics and machine learning.


--Quick Revision--
1. Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service)

Think of S3 as a giant online hard drive where you can store unlimited files (called objects) inside buckets.

Real-life example:
Imagine Google Drive, but for companies. A media company stores all their videos in S3. Netflix-like platforms can stream movies directly from it.

Use case in data engineering: Store raw CSV logs from your app in S3, then later query or process them.
---

2. Amazon Athena

Athena is a serverless query engine that lets you run SQL queries directly on data stored in S3. No database setup needed.

Real-life example:
Suppose you have millions of e-commerce sales logs in S3. Instead of loading into MySQL, you can query directly with Athena:

SELECT region, SUM(sales) 
FROM s3_sales_data 
GROUP BY region;

You pay only for the data scanned. Like opening a huge Excel file in the cloud and filtering rows instantly.
---

3. AWS Lambda

Lambda is serverless compute — you run small pieces of code without worrying about servers. It only runs when triggered.

Real-life example:
When someone uploads a photo to S3, Lambda automatically resizes it into a thumbnail.

In data pipelines: A Lambda function triggers when new data lands in S3 → cleans data → sends it to Glue for ETL.
---

4. Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud)

EC2 is basically renting a computer (server) in the cloud. You decide CPU, memory, OS, etc.

Real-life example:
A startup hosts their website on an EC2 server instead of buying a physical machine.

For data engineers: You can spin up a heavy EC2 instance to run Spark jobs or ML training.
---

5. Amazon CloudWatch

CloudWatch is like a CCTV + alarm system for your AWS resources. It monitors logs, performance, and sends alerts.

Real-life example:
If your EC2 server CPU usage goes above 80%, CloudWatch sends you an alert on email/SMS.

In pipelines: Monitor Lambda errors, Glue job failures, or S3 storage usage.
---

6. AWS Glue

Glue is a serverless ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) service. It helps clean, transform, and move data.

Real-life example:
A retail company collects sales data from multiple stores in different formats. Glue automatically detects schema, cleans null values, and stores it in a structured format for analysis.

Often used with S3 + Athena → (S3 raw → Glue cleans → Athena queries).
---

7. AWS IAM (Identity and Access Management)

IAM is like the security guard of AWS. It controls who can do what.

Real-life example:
In a company:

Data analyst only gets read-only access to S3.

Data engineer can run Glue jobs.

Admin has full control.


Without IAM, everyone would have keys to the bank vault.
---

How they work together in a pipeline:

1. Data lands in S3 (raw logs).


2. A Lambda function triggers on new files → does some quick filtering.


3. Glue cleans and organizes the data into tables.


4. Analysts run SQL queries on it with Athena.


5. All resources are secured with IAM roles.


6. CloudWatch monitors errors and sends alerts.


7. If needed, an EC2 instance runs heavier ML models on that data.
8.


Why Use AWS?

AWS is widely used because of its flexibility, scalability, security, and integration with tools for data engineering, analytics, and machine learning. It helps organizations reduce infrastructure costs while ensuring high availability.
